>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JULY 16...
THE U.S. SENATE VOTE ON THE
REPUBLICAN HEALTHCARE PLAN IS
POSTPONED, AGAIN.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SEVERE AUSTERITY MEASURES
IMPOSED IN PUERTO RICO, AS THE
U.S. TERRITORY TRIES TO PAY OFF
$70 BILLION DOLLARS IN DEBT.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THIS WEEK'S EXPECTED VOTE ON THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY'S SENATE BILL
TO REPEAL AND REPLACE PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S AFFORDABLE CARE ACT HAS
BEEN POSTPONED.
THE PARTY'S GRIP ON A MAJORITY
OF SENATORS WHO MAY SUPPORT THE
BILL IS SO TENUOUS, THAT THE
ABSENCE OF ONE SENATOR WOULD
TORPEDO THE EFFORT.
SO WHEN ARIZONA'S JOHN McCAIN
SAID LAST NIGHT THAT SURGERY TO
REMOVE A BLOOD CLOT ABOVE HIS
EYE WILL SIDELINE HIM FROM THE
SENATE SESSION THIS WEEK,
MAJORITY LEADER MITCH McCONNELL
CALLED OFF THE VOTE.
ALREADY TWO REPUBLICANS, MAINE'S
SUSAN COLLINS AND KENTUCKY'S
RAND PAUL, PUBLICLY SAY THEY'LL
OPPOSE THE CURRENT VERSION OF
THE BILL THAT WAS UNVEILED
THURSDAY.
THIS REDUCES REPUBLICAN VOTES
FOR THE PLAN FROM 52 TO 50.
TODAY, THE SENATORS REITERATED
THEIR POSITIONS, PAUL SAYING THE
BILL DOESN'T CUT INSURANCE COSTS
ENOUGH.
>> IT KEEPS THE INSURANCE
MANDATES THAT CAUSE THE PRICES
TO RISE, WHICH CHASE YOUNG,
HEALTHY PEOPLE OUT OF THE
MARKETPLACE, AND LEADS TO WHAT
PEOPLE CALL ADVERSE SELECTION,
WHERE YOU HAVE A SICKER AND
SICKER INSURANCE POOL AND THE
PREMIUMS KEEP RISING THROUGH THE
ROOF.
>> Sreenivasan: COLLINS SAID THE
BILL CUTS COVERAGE TOO MUCH, AND
SHE ESTIMATES THAT 8-10 OTHER
REPUBLICAN SENATORS SHARE HER
CONCERNS.
>> THIS BILL WOULD IMPOSE
FUNDAMENTAL SWEEPING CHANGES IN
THE MEDICAID PROGRAM.
AND THOSE INCLUDE VERY DEEP CUTS
THAT WOULD AFFECT SOME OF THE
MOST VULNERABLE PEOPLE IN OUR
SOCIETY, INCLUDING DISABLED
CHILDREN, POOR SENIORS.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY, PRESIDENT
TRUMP'S HEALTH SECRETARY, TOM
PRICE, DEFENDED THE PLAN.
>> WE HAVE PREMIUMS THAT ARE
SKYROCKETING.
WE'VE GOT DEDUCTIBLES THAT ARE
SO HIGH THAT INDIVIDUALS HAVE
COVERAGE BUT THEY DON'T HAVE
CARE.
THIS IS A SYSTEM THAT IS CRYING
OUT FOR REFORM AND REVISION.
>> Sreenivasan: THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT HAS ADDED 21 MILLION
AMERICANS TO INSURANCE ROLLS,
TWO-THIRDS OF THEM THROUGH
MEDICAID, AND 20 REPUBLICAN
SENATORS REPRESENT STATES THAT
EXPANDED MEDICAID THROUGH
OBAMACARE.
GOVERNORS, OF COURSE, DON'T GET
TO VOTE ON ANY CONGRESSIONAL
LEGISLATION, BUT THEY DO HAVE A
BIG VOICE AND STAKE IN HEALTH
CARE.
AT THIS WEEK'S NATIONAL
GOVERNORS ASSOCIATION IN
PROVIDENCE, RHODE ISLAND, THERE
WAS BIPARTISAN SKEPTICISM AND
EVEN RESISTANCE TO THE
REPUBLICAN PLAN.
"WASHINGTON POST" REPORTER SEAN
SULLIVAN WAS AT THE GOVERNORS
GATHERING AND JOINS ME NOW FROM
WASHINGTON.
THE GOVERNORS ASSOCIATION
SUMMER MEETING NOT USUALLY
SOMETHING THAT WE CARE MUCH
ABOUT BUT RIGHT NOW WHY ARE THE
SPOTLIGHTS SO TUNED IN ON THIS
CONVERSATION?
>> THIS IS USUALLY A REALLY LOW
KEY AFFAIR THAT DOESN'T
GENERATE A LOT OF NEWS.
BUT THIS TIME IT WAS A CLOSELY
WATCHED GATHERING AND THE
REASON WAS HEALTH CARE.
A LOT OF REPUBLICAN SENATORS WHO
ARE ON THE FENCE RIGHT NOW ABOUT
VOTING FOR THIS SENATE BILL ARE
LOOKING TO THEIR HOME STATE
GOVERNORS, THEY'RE LOOKING TO
THEM FOR GUIDANCE.
THEY'RE LOOKING TO SEE HOW THEY
RESPOND TO THIS BILL.
BECAUSE IN THE END IT'S GOING TO
BE THE GOVERNORS THAT ARE GOING
TO BEAR A LOT OF THE
RESPONSIBILITY FOR SOME OF THE
COVERAGE LOSSES THAT MAY COME
ABOUT AS A RESULT OF THIS BILL,
SOME OF THE CUTS TO MEDICAID
THAT MAY COME ABOUT AS A RESULT
OF THIS BILL.
SO THEY ARE WATCHING THESE
GOVERNORS VERY CLOSELY BEFORE
THEY ULTIMATELY SAY, "AM I GOING
TO VOTE YES, AM I GOING TO VOTE
NO?"
THERE ARE A LOT OF SKEPTICAL
REPUBLICAN GOVERNORS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND BRIAN
SANDOVAL, THE GOVERNOR FROM
NEVADA, SEEMS TO BE THE BELLE
OF THE BALL HERE.
HE SEEMS TO HAVE A LOT OF SWAY.
>> YEAH, IF YOU'RE GOING TO
WATCH ONE REPUBLICAN, AND YOU
WANT TO FIGURE OUT HOW THIS
WHOLE THING IS GOING TO SHAKE
OUT, WHETHER THIS BILL WILL PASS
OR NOT, YOU SHOULD WATCH BRIAN
SANDOVAL.
HE IS VERY, VERY POPULAR IN THE
STATE OF NEVADA.
HE WAS THE FIRST REPUBLICAN
GOVERNOR TO EXPAND MEDICAID
UNDER THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
AND HE SAID HE IS REALLY, REALLY
WORRIED ABOUT THE CUTS TO
MEDICAID, THE LONG-TERM FEDERAL
SPENDING CUTS TO MEDICAID THAT
THIS SENATE BILL WOULD IMPOSE.
HE MET INDIVIDUALLY WITH VICE
PRESIDENT PENCE, WITH OTHER
ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS, HE
LISTENED AS PENCE GAVE A
LONG, DETAILED SPEECH.
HE LISTENED DURING A BREAKFAST
WHERE ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS
EXPLAINED WHY HE SHOULD GET
BEHIND THIS.
BUT EVEN AFTER 48 HOURS OF THAT
HARD SELL, HE WAS STILL
SKEPTICAL, HE STILL HAD HIS
WORRIES.
>> Sreenivasan: SOMETHING ELSE
THAT'S CONCERNING A LOT
GOVERNORS SEEMS TO BE THE AMOUNT
OF MONEY DEDICATED FOR OPIOID
ADDICTION, OPIOID ADDICTION
RELIEF AND HOW THESE STATES
ARE GOING TO HAVE TO DEAL WITH
THIS SIGNIFICANT CRISIS THEY
HAVE ON THEIR HANDS.
>> Reporter: THIS WAS SOMETHING
THAT WAS ADDED TO THE LATEST
VERSION OF THE BILL AT THE
REQUEST OF A COUPLE OF
REPUBLICANS FROM OHIO AND WEST
VIRGINIA, THEY ADDED A DEDICATED
$45 BILLION FUND TO TREAT OPIOID
ADDICTION IN THESE STATES ACROSS
THE COUNTRY.
AND THE GOVERNORS WE TALKED TO
WERE PLEASED, THEY SAID, LOOK,
THIS IS A STEP IN THE RIGHT
DIRECTION BUT A LOT OF SKEPTICS
SAY, LOOK, $45 BILLION, GIVEN
THE PRETTY BIG CUTS THAT WE'RE
SEEING TO FEDERAL FUNDING OF
MEDICAID IN THE LONG TERM,
THAT'S NOT A LOT.
>> Sreenivasan: SEAN SULLIVAN
OF THE WASHINGTON POST, THANKS
SO MUCH.
>> THANKS, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT
TRUMP'S PERSONAL ATTORNEY SAYS
THERE WAS NOTHING ILLEGAL ABOUT
LAST YEAR'S MEETING BETWEEN
MISTER TRUMP'S SON, SON-IN-LAW,
AND CAMPAIGN CHAIRMAN, AND A
KREMLIN-CONNECTED RUSSIAN
LAWYER AND A FORMER SOVIET
INTELLIGENCE OFFICER.
TODAY, JAY SEKULOW SAID DONALD
TRUMP JR., JARED KUSHNER, AND
PAUL MANAFORT NEVER RECEIVED THE
PROMISED OPPOSITION RESEARCH,
AND IF THEY HAD, IT'S NOT
CONSIDERED A THING OF VALUE
UNDER THE LAW.
PRESIDENT TRUMP HAD DENIED ANY
CAMPAIGN COLLUSION WITH RUSSIA.
>> I DO NOT THINK THE DENIALS
ARE SUSPECT.
I DO NOT THINK THE DENIAL BY THE
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
IS SUSPECT AT ALL.
>> Sreenivasan: EARLIER, IN ONE
OF HIS STATEMENTS ON TWITTER
TODAY, PRESIDENT TRUMP HIMSELF
SAID, "MY SON DON IS BEING
SCORNED BY THE FAKE NEWS MEDIA."
BUT THE TOP DEMOCRAT ON THE
HOUSE INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE,
ADAM SCHIFF OF CALIFORNIA, SAID
DONALD TRUMP JR.'S OWN EMAILS
ABOUT THE MEETING PROVE INTENT
TO COLLUDE WITH RUSSIA.
>> HERE YOU HAVE NOW EVIDENCE IN
BLACK AND WHITE THAT, YES, THE
CAMPAIGN WAS ENCOURAGING THE
RUSSIANS TO GIVE THEM DIRT.
>> Sreenivasan: YESTERDAY'S
FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION
FILINGS REVEAL THE TRUMP
CAMPAIGN LAST MONTH PAID $50,000
DOLLARS TO RETAIN A LAW FIRM TO
DEFEND THE PRESIDENT'S SON, A
WEEK BEFORE THE RUSSIA MEETING
BECAME PUBLIC KNOWLEDGE.
A NEW WASHINGTON POST/ABC
NEWS POLL SHOWS 60% OF
AMERICANS BELIEVE RUSSIA TRIED
TO INFLUENCE LAST YEAR'S
ELECTION, AND 41% BELIEVE THE
TRUMP CAMPAIGN INTENTIONALLY
AIDED THOSE EFFORTS.
THE POLL ALSO SHOWS PRESIDENT
TRUMP'S APPROVAL RATING HAS
DROPPED TO 36%.
DIG DEEPER INTO THOSE NUMBERS,
AND YOU'LL SEE AMERICA'S
PARTISAN DIVIDE.
TO DISCUSS THAT AND MORE,
"NEWSHOUR WEEKEND"'S JEFF
GREENFIELD IS HERE IN THE
STUDIO.
JEFF, THE CONVERSATIONS THAT
HAVE HAPPENED SINCE WE HAD THIS
REVELATION, DONALD TRUMP JR.
EXPOSING HIS OWN EMAILS SAYING,
"HERE'S THE MEETING," ETC.,
ETC., HOW DOES THAT PLAY WITH
TRUMP'S BASE?
>> IT'S AS IF IT DIDN'T MATTER.
AND THIS IS A CONSTANT.
WE HAVE BEEN TALKING ABOUT THIS
ALMOST LIKE... IT FEELS LIKE
ALMOST ON A WEEKLY BASIS.
IN THAT POLL, FEWER THAN ONE IN
TEN REPUBLICANS THINK THERE WAS
ANYTHING BOTHERSOME ABOUT THE
RUSSIA-TRUMP FAMILY CONNECTIONS.
WHAT THAT TELLS YOU IS THAT THEY
HAVE ACCEPTED TRUMP'S
FUNDAMENTAL ARGUMENT THAT IF YOU
SEE OR READ SOMETHING ABOUT ME
NEGATIVE ABOUT RUSSIA, IT'S FAKE
BY DEFINITION.
AND I THINK WHAT THAT MEANS IS
AS THE PRESS HAS MOVED FURTHER
AND FURTHER TO SAY, "THERE'S
SOMETHING HERE," WHAT YOU SEE IS
SOME CONSERVATIVE COLUMNISTS,
LIKE CHARLES KRAUTHAMMER, SAYING
"YEAH, THIS IS SERIOUS."
BUT THEY NEVER WERE FOR TRUMP
IN THE FIRST PLACE.
IF YOU LOOK AT HANNITY, "FOX
AND FRIENDS," AND BREITBART,
AND THAT POLL NUMBER, WHAT
YOU SEE IS AMONG TRUMP'S REAL
SUPPORTERS, THEY JUST AREN'T
BUYING THAT ANYTHING HAPPENED
HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: CAN ANYTHING
CHANGE THAT?
>> YOU KNOW, IN A NORMAL WORLD,
IN A NORMAL POLITICAL WORLD I'D
BE KIND OF CONFIDENT SAYING,
"YEAH, IF THE REPUBLICANS IN
CONGRESS BEGIN TO REALLY GET
TOUGH ON TRUMP, SAY, "WHAT'S
GOING ON HERE?
WE'RE REALLY BOTHERED BY THIS.
THIS IS A HOSTILE FOREIGN
POWER, WHAT'S GOING ON?"
THAT THAT WOULD HAVE AN IMPACT
AMONG THE BASE.
BUT ONE OF THE CURIOUS THINGS
WE'RE SEEING IS THAT AMONG
TRUMP'S SUPPORTERS, THEY'RE NOT
ALL THAT HAPPY WITH THE
REPUBLICANS IN CONGRESS ANYWAY.
YOU SEE DECLINING POLL NUMBERS
ABOUT WHAT REPUBLICANS THINK OF
THE REPUBLICAN CONGRESSIONAL
LEADERS, YOU'VE SEEN SOME
REALLY SHARP ATTACKS ON THE
PART OF BREITBART AND SOME OF
THE RADIO PERSONALITIES LIKE
RUSH LIMBAUGH AND SEAN HANNITY,
SAYING, "YOU KNOW, YOU GUYS
AREN'T FIGHTING HARD ENOUGH, YOU
MIGHT BE RAISING TAXES ON US,"
THEY ARE NOT BLAMING TRUMP.
SO IF THE REPUBLICANS BEGIN TO
SAY IN CONGRESS, "THIS RUSSIA
THING IS BOTHERING US," I'M NOT
SURE THAT TRUMP PEOPLE ARE GOING
TO TAKE THAT AS AN OCCASION TO
LEAVE THE RESERVATION.
>> Sreenivasan: LET'S TALK A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT HEALTH CARE,
WHICH IS IN THE NEWS TODAY.
IT LOOKS LIKE IT'S GOING TO BE
POSTPONED AT LEAST ANOTHER
WEEK.
IF IT DOESN'T COME UP FOR A
VOTE, OR IF IT COMES UP FOR A
VOTE AND DOESN'T PASS, ANY
CONSEQUENCE FOR THE PRESIDENT?
>> FOR TRUMP?
SEE PREVIOUS ANSWER.
IN THE NON-TRUMP UNIVERSE, IF
A PRESIDENT RUNS ON A KEY
PROMISE-- "I'M GOING TO REPEAL
AND REPLACE THIS TERRIBLE LAW"
AND IT FAILS, IT WOULD CLOBBER
HIM.
THAT'S WHAT HAPPENED TO CLINTON.
WHEN HIS HEALTH CARE PLAN
FAILED, A YEAR LATER THEY LOST
THE CONGRESS, THE DEMOCRATS.
ONCE AGAIN, AND THIS ONE, I
THINK, IS REALLY SOMETHING WE'VE
NEVER SEEN BEFORE, BECAUSE
DONALD TRUMP IS NOT SEEN AS A
LEGISLATIVE MASTER, NOT KEEN ON
THE DETAILS, IN FACT WE'VE HAD
REPUBLICANS IN MEDIA KIND OF
POLITE IN SAYING HE DOESN'T
KNOW MUCH OR CARE MUCH WHAT'S
IN THE BILL.
HE HAS SAID GIVE ME SOMETHING
AND I'LL SIGN IT.
SO IF IT WERE TO FAIL, WHO DO
THE TRUMP FOLKS BLAME?
THE PRESIDENT OR DO THEY BLAME
THE CONGRESSIONAL LEADERSHIP?
THAT'S WHERE I THINK THE FALLOUT
WILL HAPPEN.
>> Sreenivasan: JEFF
GREENFIELD, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> OKAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE STATE
DEPARTMENT IS CALLING FOR THE
RELEASE OF A U.S. CITIZEN
SENTENCED TODAY BY IRAN TO TEN
YEARS IN PRISON.
CHINESE-BORN XIYUE WANG IS A 37-
YEAR-OLD PRINCETON UNIVERSITY
GRADUATE STUDENT WHO'S BEEN IN
CUSTODY FOR 11 MONTHS.
HE HAD OPENLY BEEN DOING
RESEARCH IN IRAN'S NATIONAL
ARCHIVES.
THE IRANIAN JUDICIARY SAID HE"
INFILTRATED" THE ARCHIVES, AND
4,500 DOCUMENTS HE DIGITALLY
COPIED WERE "CONFIDENTIAL
ARTICLES."
WANG CAN APPEAL THE SENTENCE.
VENEZUELANS OPPOSED TO PRESIDENT
NICOLAS MADURO PARTICIPATED IN A
SYMBOLIC REFERENDUM TODAY.
ONE BALLOT QUESTION ASKED IF
THEY WANT ELECTIONS BEFORE
MADURO'S TERM ENDS IN 2018.
THE OIL RICH NATION IS
STRUGGLING WITH TRIPLE-DIGIT
INFLATION AND SHORTAGES OF FOOD
AND MEDICINE.
MADURO CALLED TODAY'S VOTE
MEANINGLESS.
HE'S SCHEDULED A JULY 30TH VOTE
FOR A NEW NATIONAL ASSEMBLY THAT
COULD AMEND THE CONSTITUTION TO
GIVE HIM MORE POWER.
AN EFFORT TO FUND AN ANIMATED
SHORT ABOUT A FATHER ATTEMPTING
TO STYLE HIS DAUGHTER'S HAIR HAS
RECEIVED A FLOOD OF SUPPORT
ONLINE.
FIND OUT MORE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
AS WE HAVE REPORTED ON "THE
NEWSHOUR" AND "NEWSHOUR WEEKEND"
OVER THE PAST TWO YEARS, THE
UNITED STATES TERRITORY OF
PUERTO RICO IS AN ISLAND IN
ECONOMIC DISTRESS.
IN THE PAST DECADE, SEEING DIM
ECONOMIC PROSPECTS, 450,000
PUERTO RICANS, WHO ARE U.S.
CITIZENS, HAVE LEFT THE ISLAND,
MAINLY FOR COMMUNITIES IN TEXAS,
FLORIDA, NEW YORK, AND ILLINOIS.
THE ISLAND FACES A DEEP
RECESSION, HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT,
AND A HIGH POVERTY RATE.
IN RESPONSE CONGRESS HAS IMPOSED
CONTROVERSIAL NEW AUSTERITY
MEASURES.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S IVETTE
FELICIANO RETURNS TO PUERTO RICO
TO REPORT ON THE REACTION.
>> Reporter: ALONG THE STREETS
OF SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO,
GRAFFITI READING "NO MORE ABUSE"
AND "FASCISM IN PUERTO RICO" ARE
A WINDOW INTO THE UNREST SPARKED
BY THE LARGEST FINANCIAL CRISIS
IN THE ISLAND'S HISTORY.
SINCE JANUARY, THOUSANDS HAVE
PROTESTED AUSTERITY MEASURES AND
CUTS TO PUBLIC SERVICES IMPOSED
ON THIS U.S. TERRITORY THAT'S
HOME TO 3.4 MILLION U.S.
CITIZENS.
BUT PUERTO RICO CURRENTLY OWES
CREDITORS A MASSIVE $72-BILLION
DOLLARS.
LAST YEAR, FOLLOWING A SERIES OF
DEFAULTS ON DEBT PAYMENTS,
CONGRESS PASSED, AND PRESIDENT
OBAMA SIGNED, THE PUERTO RICO
OVERSIGHT MANAGEMENT AND
ECONOMIC STABILITY ACT, OR
"PROMESA," WHICH MEANS "PROMISE"
IN SPANISH.
THE LAW GAVE A FINANCIAL
OVERSIGHT BOARD VETO POWER OVER
PUERTO RICO'S BUDGET AND
PROVIDED A PROCESS TO
RESTRUCTURE THE DEBT.
DID YOU REALIZE WHAT YOU WERE
GETTING YOURSELF INTO?
>> I DID NOT.
>> Reporter: JOSE CARRION, WHO
RUNS A LARGE INSURANCE BROKERAGE
IN SAN JUAN, CHAIRS THE
APPOINTED SEVEN MEMBER BOARD.
>> THE BUDGET WAS UNBALANCED BY
AROUND $3-BILLION DOLLARS.
SO WE HAD TO BEGIN GETTING OUR
FISCAL AFFAIRS IN ORDER, AND
THAT ENTAILED DIFFICULT
DECISIONS AS TO, YOU KNOW, MAJOR
SPENDING.
>> Reporter: THOSE DIFFICULT
DECISIONS INCLUDED CUTS TO
PENSION PAYMENTS FOR RETIRED
GOVERNMENT WORKERS, REDUCING
SPENDING ON HEALTHCARE, CLOSING
179 PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND REDUCING
THE GOVERNMENT WORKFORCE.
SINCE 2013, NEARLY 30,000
GOVERNMENT WORKERS HAVE LOST
THEIR JOBS.
ROXANA PEREZ HAD WORKED AS AN
ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT FOR THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT IN CAROLINA, A
TOWN OUTSIDE OF SAN JUAN.
>> (translated): I LOVE
SERVING MY COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: SHE'S NOW LOOKING
FOR A NEW JOB, BUT IT'S NOT
EASY.
THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE IN PUERTO
RICO IS 11%, TWO-AND-A-HALF
TIMES THE U.S. RATE.
I ASKED WHETHER SHE WAS WORRIED
THE POSITION COULD BE CUT, GIVEN
THE DEBT CRISIS.
>> (translated): I HAD FAITH
THAT MAYBE THERE WOULD BE AN
OPPORTUNITY TO CONTINUE.
THERE IS A REAL NEED FOR CIVIL
EMPLOYEES HERE AT THE PUERTO
RICAN POLICE, BELIEVE ME.
>> Reporter: THIS SPRING,
STUDENTS AND FACULTY PROTESTED A
PROPOSED $450-MILLION DOLLAR
BUDGET CUT TO THE UNIVERSITY
SYSTEM OVER THE NEXT FOUR YEARS.
ARCHITECTURE STUDENT MINETTE
BONILLA WAS PART OF A DELEGATION
THAT MET WITH THE FISCAL
OVERSIGHT BOARD.
>> WE ASKED THEM POINT BLANK,
"DO YOU KNOW WHAT THE
CONSEQUENCES WILL BE OF THOSE
CUTS? DO YOU KNOW WHAT THE
CONSEQUENCES WILL BE FOR
STUDENTS AND THEIR ACCESSIBILITY
TO EDUCATION?"
"WE HAVEN'T DONE THOSE STUDIES."
SO THEY'RE JUST CUTTING OUT OF
SHEER NUMBERS WITHOUT KNOWING
ANY IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PEOPLE
THAT ARE SUFFERING THOSE CUTS.
>> Reporter: MORE BROADLY,
STUDENTS ALSO WANT A THOROUGH
AUDIT OF THE ISLAND'S PUBLIC
DEBT BY AN INDEPENDENT BODY.
BUT ABOVE ALL, STUDENTS LIKE
MARIO GONZALEZ NEVARES ARE
CRITICAL OF THE PROMESA LAW,
WHICH CREATED THE BOARD IN THE
FIRST PLACE.
>> PROMESA IS THE EXAMPLE OF
COLONIALISM IN THE 21ST CENTURY.
THIS LAW WAS CREATED
UNILATERALLY BY THE U.S.
CONGRESS, AND IT WAS IMPOSED
OVER PUERTO RICO. AND IT'S ONLY,
ONLY REASON TO EXIST IS TO MAKE
SURE THE BONDHOLDERS ARE PAID.
>> Reporter: PUERTO RICO'S $72-
BILLION DOLLAR DEBT IS OWED TO
BONDHOLDERS, OR CREDITORS, WHO
BOUGHT BONDS THAT FINANCED THE
ISLAND'S GOVERNMENT.
THAT INCLUDES LARGE INVESTORS
LIKE MUTUAL FUNDS AND HEDGE
FUNDS ON THE U.S. MAINLAND, AS
WELL AS LOCAL PUERTO RICANS.
THERE ARE THOSE ON THE ISLAND
WHO BELIEVE THAT THE BOARD IS
MORE CLOSELY ALIGNED TO THE
NEEDS OF THE CREDITORS, HOW DO
YOU RESPOND TO THOSE CRITICISMS?
>> I DON'T CONSIDER MYSELF
BEHOLDEN TO ANY PARTICULAR
BONDHOLDER CLASS.
WE'RE TRYING TO DO THE BEST WE
CAN UNDER EXTREMELY DIFFICULT
CIRCUMSTANCES, BUT THE REALITY
IS THAT WE'RE TAKING EVERYTHING
AND EVERYBODY INTO CONSIDERATION
AND TRYING TO BALANCE ALL THOSE
INTERESTS.
>> Reporter: BUT BONDHOLDERS ARE
WORRIED.
RAFAEL ROJO IS A SAN JUAN REAL
ESTATE DEVELOPER AND CHAIRMAN OF
BONISTAS DEL PATIO, A GROUP
REPRESENTING SOME OF THE 60,000
PUERTO RICAN BONDHOLDERS.
HE ESTIMATES THEY'RE OWED $15-
BILLION DOLLARS.
>> BEHIND WALL STREET, THERE'S A
LOT OF INDIVIDUAL PEOPLE WHO
HAVE THEIR SAVINGS IN THESE
INSTRUMENTS.
>> Reporter: ROJO IS ALARMED BY
THE PUERTO RICAN GOVERNMENT'S
PLAN TO PAY BACK LESS THAN A
QUARTER OF THE DEBT IT OWES OVER
THE NEXT DECADE.
>> IT'S QUITE CLEAR, AND IT'S
SCIENTIFICALLY IMPOSSIBLE TO SAY
OTHERWISE, IT IS THE BONDHOLDERS
WHO HAVE BEEN TARGETED AS THE
ONES WHO ARE GOING TO PAY FOR
THE CRISIS.
AND I THINK THAT'S A HUGE
MISTAKE.
>> Reporter: HE'D LIKE TO SEE
THE SIZE OF PUERTO RICO'S
GOVERNMENT SHRUNK EVEN MORE, AND
THE 78 SEPARATE MUNICIPALITIES
ON THE ISLAND CONSOLIDATE THEIR
SERVICES.
THE OVERSIGHT BOARD FORECASTS
THE ISLAND'S ECONOMY WILL
CONTINUE TO SHRINK THROUGH 2021
BEFORE STARTING TO GROW.
YET OUTSIDE ECONOMISTS, SUCH AS
NOBEL LAUREATE JOSEPH STIGLITZ,
WARN THE BOARD'S AUSTERITY
MEASURES WILL ALL BUT GUARANTEE
A SOCIAL AS WELL AS AN ECONOMIC
CATASTROPHE.
ARE THERE EXAMPLES OF ECONOMIES
ELSEWHERE IN THE WORLD THAT HAVE
EVENTUALLY GROWN UNDER
AUSTERITY?
>> PUERTO RICO'S SITUATION IS
VERY SPECIFIC.
IT IS UNLIKE GREECE IN THAT IT
IS NOT A SOVEREIGN NATION.
IF FOLKS HERE DO NOT CARE FOR
WHAT'S GOING ON, THEY WILL MOVE
OFF ISLAND.
COMPARISONS ARE DIFFICULT IN
LIGHT OF PUERTO RICO'S
TERRITORIAL SITUATION.
>> Reporter: PUERTO RICO HAS
BEEN UNDER U.S. CONTROL SINCE
THE END OF THE SPANISH-AMERICAN
WAR IN 1898, AND IN 1947 WAS
GRANTED AN ELECTED GOVERNMENT.
BUT AS AN UNINCORPORATED
TERRITORY, THE U.S. CONGRESS IN
WASHINGTON CAN OVERRIDE THE
ISLAND'S LAWS, AND PUERTO RICANS
CANNOT VOTE FOR PRESIDENT AND
HAVE NO VOTING REPRESENTATION IN
CONGRESS.
THE APPOINTMENT OF A FISCAL
CONTROL BOARD AND THE EFFECT OF
AUSTERITY MEASURES ON THE ISLAND
HAVE RE-IGNITED A DECADES-OLD
DEBATE REGARDING PUERTO RICO'S
RELATIONSHIP TO THE UNITED
STATES.
MANY PEOPLE HERE, INCLUDING THE
GOVERNOR, BELIEVE A SOLUTION TO
THE ECONOMIC CRISIS WILL NEVER
BE FOUND UNLESS THE TERRITORY'S
POLITICAL STATUS IS RESOLVED
ONCE AND FOR ALL.
>> THE VOICE OF THE PUERTO RICAN
PEOPLE WAS LOUD AND CLEAR.
>> Reporter: LAST MONTH, 97% OF
PUERTO RICANS VOTED FOR THE
TERRITORY TO BECOME THE 51ST
U.S. STATE IN A REFERENDUM
ORGANIZED BY THE ISLAND'S PRO-
STATEHOOD GOVERNOR.
YET ONLY 23% OF ELIGIBLE VOTERS
TURNED OUT.
THE VOTE WAS HEAVILY BOYCOTTED
BY THOSE FAVORING INDEPENDENCE
AND THE STATUS QUO OF REMAINING
A COMMONWEALTH.
IT'S UP TO CONGRESS TO RATIFY
STATEHOOD, BUT PREVIOUS
REFERENDA HAVE BEEN IGNORED, AND
THE CURRENT MOVEMENT HAS SCANT
SUPPORT ON CAPITOL HILL.
>> IF WE'RE AMERICAN CITIZENS,
WE SHOULD STRIVE TO HAVE FIRST-
CLASS TREATMENT IN PUERTO RICO.
>> Reporter: FORMER PUERTO RICAN
SECRETARY OF STATE KENNETH
McCLINTOCK IS PRESIDENT OF
EQUALITY FOR PUERTO RICO", A
PRO-STATEHOOD LOBBY GROUP.
>> ONCE WE MOVE TO ORLANDO, OR
NEW YORK, OR TEXAS, OR NORTH
CAROLINA, WE'RE TREATED AS FIRST
CLASS CITIZENS.
WE HAVE THE RIGHT TO VOTE, WE
HAVE THE RIGHT TO CONGRESSIONAL
REPRESENTATION, WE HAVE THE
RIGHT TO PARTICIPATE IN EVERY
FEDERAL PROGRAM.
>> Reporter: McCLINTOCK BELIEVES
PUERTO RICO'S TERRITORY STATUS
LED TO THE CRISIS, IN PART,
BECAUSE PAST GOVERNMENTS WERE
FORCED TO BORROW FOR ESSENTIAL
SERVICES LIKE ROADS AND HEALTH
CARE.
FOR EXAMPLE, PUERTO RICO
RECEIVES MUCH LESS FEDERAL
FUNDING FOR MEDICAID THAN U.S.
STATES DO.
>> THE TRUTH IS THAT THERE WILL
NOT BE A STABLE FISCAL
SITUATION, ECONOMIC SITUATION IN
PUERTO RICO, UNTIL THERE'S
ECONOMIC GROWTH.
AND THERE WILL NOT BE A HEALTHY
ECONOMIC GROWTH RATE UNTIL THERE
IS EQUALITY.
>> I'M ONE OF THE PEOPLE THAT
BELIEVE THAT WE SHOULD
DEFINITELY ATTEND TO THE ISSUE
OF STATUS.
BUT IT'S NOT A MAGIC WAND THAT
WILL RESOLVE ALL OF OUR
PROBLEMS.
>> Reporter: MANUEL NATAL, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN PUERTO RICO'S
OWN LEGISLATURE, FAVORS
REMAINING A COMMONWEALTH WITH
MORE ECONOMIC SOVEREIGNTY.
FOR EXAMPLE, HE'D LIKE CONGRESS
TO REPEAL THE CENTURY-OLD LAW
THAT REQUIRES ALL IMPORTS TO
ARRIVE ON AMERICAN MADE AND
MANNED SHIPS, WHICH MAKES ALL
FOOD AND GOODS MORE EXPENSIVE.
>> THE TOOLS THAT WE HAVE TO
ACHIEVE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN
PUERTO RICO, ONE CONGRESS MIGHT
GIVE IT TO YOU, ANOTHER CONGRESS
MIGHT TAKE IT AWAY.
>> Reporter: BUT FOR SOME ON THE
ISLAND, THE SOLUTION FOR PUERTO
RICO IS SEPARATING FROM THE U.S.
AND BECOMING A SOVEREIGN NATION.
>> PUERTO RICO IS A LATIN
AMERICAN, CARIBBEAN NATIONALITY
WITH ITS OWN IDENTITY.
>> Reporter: PUERTO RICAN
SENATOR JUAN DELMAU LEADS THE
PUERTO RICAN INDEPENDENCE PARTY,
THE THIRD LARGEST ON THE ISLAND.
>> (translated): AN
INDEPENDENT PUERTO RICO WOULD
HAVE POLITICAL AND LEGAL
AUTHORITY TO JOIN THE GLOBAL
COMMUNITY AND OPEN MARKETS WHILE
AT THE SAME TIME MAINTAINING
FRIENDSHIP AND COOPERATION WITH
THE U.S. BUT ON AN EQUAL
FOOTING, NOT IN POLITICAL
SUBORDINATION.
>> Reporter: WHILE CHALLENGES TO
THE STATUS QUO PERSIST, LAST
MONTH, THE FEDERALLY APPOINTED
FINANCIAL OVERSIGHT BOARD
APPROVED DEEP SPENDING CUTS TO
PUERTO RICO'S BUDGET.
>> REGARDLESS OF HOW ANYONE
FEELS ABOUT STATUS IN PUERTO
RICO, YOU NEED A BALANCED
BUDGET.
>> Reporter: THIS GRAFFITI ON
ONE SAN JUAN STREET READS "DOWN
WITH HIS MAJESTY JOSE CARRION"
>> IT MAKES ME SAD, AND YOU
KNOW, I'M NOT A POLITICIAN, SO
I'M LEARNING TO DEAL WITH
CRITICISM OF THAT NATURE.
>> Reporter: YET, CARRION SAYS
HE UNDERSTANDS THE CRITICISM
THAT HIS BOARD IS NOT
ACCOUNTABLE TO THE ISLAND'S
RESIDENTS.
>> THERE'S NO WAY ANYBODY COULD
CONCEIVABLY THINK THAT THIS IS A
DEMOCRATIC PROCESS.
BUT, HOW ABOUT LOOKING AT THE
POSITIVE SIDES.
THE LAW, IT PROVIDES US THE
OPPORTUNITY TO PROCURE A WAY
FORWARD, AND TO RESTRUCTURE, YOU
KNOW, $72-BILLION WORTH OF DEBT.
WE NEED TO TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY
THAT CONGRESS HAS PROVIDED US
AND MOVE OUR PEOPLE AND OUR
ISLAND FORWARD.
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE HAVE BEEN
A RASH OF ACID ATTACKS IN THE
U.K, WHERE THE VICTIMS ARE
DOUSED WITH CHEMICALS.
THERE WERE FIVE SUCH INCIDENTS
JUST THIS PAST THURSDAY.
NOW THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT IS
CONSIDERING TOUGHER SENTENCES
FOR PERPETRATORS OF ACID
ATTACKS.
ITN'S HELENA CARTER HAS MORE.
>> I'M STILL SHOCKED.
I'M SCARED.
WITH I WHEN I THINK ABOUT AAS TO
HOW THESE THINGS HAPPEN AND WHY
ME.
>> Reporter: THESE THINGS
HAPPENED JUST A FEW DAYS AGO.
JAVAD IS LUCKY NOT TO BE SCARRED
PHYSICALLY BUT THE MENTAL EFFECT
IS HUGE.
>> STILL GOT PAIN ALL OVER MY
BODY.
>> Reporter: NOW MINISTERS
ARE FACING CALLS TO TIGHTER LAWS
AND TOUGHER SENTENCES, TO PEOPLE
WHO CARRY OUT ACID ATTACKS IN
ENGLAND AND WALES, SINCE 2010
THERE HAVE BEEN 1800 ATTACKS OF
CORROSIVE SUBSTANCES ACROSS
BRITAIN.
MORE THAN 400 ATTACKS WERE
CARRIED OUT IN ENGLAND AND WAYS
AND MEANS AND WHERE THE OFFENDER
WAS KNOWN ONE IN FIVE WAS
YOUNGER THAN 18.
THE GOVERNMENT REVIEW WILL LOOK
INTO CLASSING ACID AS A
DANGEROUS WEAPON AND IMPROVING
SUPPORT TO VICTIMS.
>> LOTS OF VICTIMS HAVE SAID
THAT THEIR LIVES HAVE BEEN
RUINED.
WHY AREN'T THERE LIFE SENTENCES
TO REALLY MAKE SURE THE WHOLE
SYSTEM REALLY RESPONDS URGENTLY
AND THOROUGHLY TO THIS APPALLING
CRIME.
>> FOR THOSE WHO HAVE ALREADY
BEEN THROUGH HORROR OF AN ACID
ATTACK THIS ACTION IS VITAL.
>> YOU CAN'T DO ANYTHING BECAUSE
IT IS NOT IN OUR HAND.
THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD HAVE TAKEN
ACTION BEFORE.
>>Reporter: EXACTLY HOW TO CRACK
DOWN ON THESE LIFE CHANGING ACID
ATTACKS WILL BE DEBATED IN THE
COMMONS TOMORROW.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, TENNIS
GREAT ROGER FEDERER SAYS HE
ALWAYS BELIEVED HE COULD COME
BACK AND DO IT AGAIN.
HE WON THE WIMBLEDON MEN'S
SINGLES TITLE FOR A RECORD
EIGHTH TIME TODAY, BEATING MARIN
CILIC IN STRAIGHT SETS, FOR HIS
FIRST WIMBLEDON CROWN SINCE
2012.
AT 35, FEDERER IS THE OLDEST
MEN'S CHAMPION IN THE MODERN
ERA, AND THIS, HIS 19TH GRAND
SLAM TROPHY, IS THE MOST OF ANY
MEN.
STEFFI GRAF, SERENA WILLIAMS,
AND MARGARET COURT HAVE ALL WON
MORE GRAND SLAM SINGLES TITLES.
ON "THE NEWSHOUR" TOMORROW, HOW
THAT DELAY IN THE SENATE
REPUBLICAN HEALTHCARE PLAN VOTE
MAY AFFECT ITS OUTCOME.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.